Mesh component documentation (#1587)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/components/reference/atom/mesh.md

---
title: Model (Mesh) Component
linktitle: Model (Mesh)
description: 'Open 3D Engine (O3DE) Model (Mesh) component reference.'
toc: true
---

The **Model (Mesh)** component specifies a model to render in the scene. Model assets are supported and processed using [AssImp](https://www.assimp.org/). 

## Provider ##

[Atom Gem](/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/rendering/atom/atom/)

> ## Model (Mesh) Component Properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Model (Mesh) Component properties
```

![model-mesh-component-base-properties](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/model-mesh/model-mesh-base-properties-ui.png)

> <a name="model-mesh-component-properties"></a>

Reviewer: @amzn-tommy Gotcha. If that's the case feel free to update the docs to reflect that, and the properties image as well.

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|
| **Model asset** | Sets the model asset for this component. | Model Asset | None |

> | **Sort Key** | <a name="sort-key"> Transparent models are drawn by sort key then depth. Use this to force certain transparent models to draw before or after others. </a> | -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 | 0 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Sort Key** | <a name="sort-key"> Transparent models are first drawn by sort key, then depth. Use this to force certain transparent models to draw before or after others. | -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 | `0` |
```

| **Exclude from reflection cubemaps** | If enabled, the model will not be visible in baked reflection probe cubemaps. | Boolean | `Disabled` |

> | **Use Forward Pass IBL Specular** | Renders IBL specular reflections in the forward pass, using only the most influential probe (based on the position of the entity) and the global IBL cubemap. Can reduce rendering costs, but only recommended for static objects that are affected by at most one reflection probe. | Boolean | `Disabled` |

Author: Fixed.

| **Use ray tracing** | Includes this model in ray tracing calculations. | Boolean | `Enabled` |
| **Lod Type** | Refer to [Lod Type](#lod-type) below. | `Default`, `Screen Coverage`, `Specific Lod` | `Default` |Default (Highest) |
| **Add Material Component** | Button to add a [Material Component](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/atom/material/) to the entity | | |
| **Model Stats** | Displays mesh count, vertex count, and triangle count for each lod in the model | | |

### Lod Type

> LodType determines how Lods will be selected during rendering.

Author: Fixed.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Screen Coverage" %}}

![lod-type-screen-coverage](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/model-mesh/lod-type-ui/model-mesh-screen-coverage.png)

LodType: Screen Coverage determines which lod should be rendered based on the approximate proportion of the screen the lod will take up.

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|
| **Lod Configuration - Minimum Screen Coverage** | Minimum proportion of screen area an entity takes up. If the entity is smaller than the minimum coverage, it is culled. | 0.0 to 1.0 | 1.0f / 1080.0f |
| **Lod Configuration - Quality Decay Rate** | Rate at which mesh quality decays (0 -> always stay highest quality lod, 1 -> quality falls off to lowest quality lod immediately). | 0.0 to 1.0 | 0.5 |

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Specific Lod" %}}

![lod-type-specific-lod](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/model-mesh/lod-type-ui/model-mesh-specific-lod.png)

LodType: Specific Lod overrides the lod to be rendered instead of calculating the lod automatically.

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|

> | **Lod Configuration - Lod Override** | Sets the specific lod to render. | Default (Highest) to Lod *n*, where *n* is the lowest resolution lod | Highest |

Reviewer 2: It is not clear if Lod 1 is a higher resolution than Lod 5. Need clarification.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## MeshComponentRequestBus

> | Request Name | Description | Parameter | Return | Scriptable |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Method Name | Description | Parameter | Return | Scriptable |
```

Author: Done.

| SetQualityDecayRate | See [Lod Type: Screen Coverage Tab](#lod-type) | Quality Decay Rate: Float | None | Yes |
| GetQualityDecayRate | See [Lod Type: Screen Coverage Tab](#lod-type) | None | Quality Decay Rate: Float | Yes |
| SetVisibility | Sets if the model should be visible (true) or hidden (false). | Visibility: Boolean | None | No |
| GetVisibility | Returns the visibility. If the model is visible (true), that only means that it has not been explicitly hidden. The model may still not be visible by any views being rendered. If it is not visible (false), it will not be rendered by any views, regardless of whether or not the model is in the view frustum. | None | Visibility: Boolean | No |
| SetRayTracingEnabled | See [Use Ray Tracing](#model-mesh-component-properties) | Is Ray Tracing Enabled: Boolean | None | Yes |
| GetRayTracingEnabled | See [Use Ray Tracing](#model-mesh-component-properties) | None | Is Ray Tracing Enabled: Boolean | Yes |
| GetWorldBounds | Returns the axis-aligned bounding box for the model at its world position. | None | World Bounds: Aabb | No |

> | GetLocalBounds | Returns the axis-aligned bounding box in model space. | None | Local Bounds: Aabb | No |

Author: Done.

## MeshComponentNotificationBus

> | Request Name | Description | Parameter | Return | Scriptable |
> |-|-|-|-|-|
> | OnModelReady | Notifies listeners when a model has been loaded. If the model is already loaded when first connecting to the MeshComponentNotificationBus, the OnModelReady event will occur when connecting. | Model Asset: Asset<T>, Model: Instance<T> | None | Yes |
> | OnModelPreDestroy | Notifies listeners when the instance of the model for this component is about to be released | None | None | No |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Method Name | Description | Parameter | Return | Scriptable |
|-|-|-|-|-|
| `OnModelReady` | Notifies listeners when a model has been loaded. If the model is already loaded when first connecting to the `MeshComponentNotificationBus`, the `OnModelReady` event will occur when connecting. | Model Asset: `Asset<T>`, Model: `Instance<T>` | None | Yes |
| `OnModelPreDestroy` | Notifies listeners when the instance of the model for this component is about to be released. | None | None | No |
```

Author: Done.

[Atom Gem](/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/rendering/atom/atom/)

## Mesh Component properties

![mesh-component-base-properties](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/mesh/mesh-base-properties-ui.png)

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|
| **Model Asset** | Sets the model asset for this component. | Model Asset | None |
| **Sort Key** | Transparent models are first drawn by sort key, then depth. Use this to force certain transparent models to draw before or after others. | -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 | `0` |
| **Exclude from reflection cubemaps** | If enabled, the model will not be visible in baked reflection probe cubemaps. | Boolean | `Disabled` |
| **Use Forward Pass IBL Specular** | Renders image-based lighting (IBL) specular reflections in the forward pass, by using only the most influential probe (based on the position of the entity) and the global IBL cubemap. It can reduce rendering costs, but is only recommended for static objects that are affected by at most one reflection probe. | Boolean | `Disabled` |
| **Use ray tracing** | Includes this model in ray tracing calculations. | Boolean | `Enabled` |

> | **LOD Type** | Refer to [LOD Type](#lod-type) below. | `Default`, `Screen Coverage`, `Specific LOD` | `Default` |Default (Highest) |

Reviewer: > |Default (Highest) |
- Did you mean for this to appear in the **Default** column? Currently, it doesn't appear at all since the table is only four columns. 
- If you do want to keep "(Highest)" in, can you explain what that indicates? Maybe in the description. 
```suggestion
| **LOD Type** | Refer to [LOD Type](#lod-type) below. | `Default`, `Screen Coverage`, `Specific LOD` | `Default` |
```

> | **Add Material Component** | Button to add a [Material Component](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/atom/material/) to the entity | | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Add Material Component** | Button to add a [Material Component](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/atom/material/) to the entity. | | |
```

> | **Model Stats** | Displays mesh count, vertex count, and triangle count for each LOD in the model | | |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Model Stats** | Displays mesh count, vertex count, and triangle count for each LOD in the model. | | |
```

### LOD Type

> LOD Type determines how level of detail (LOD) will be selected during rendering.

Reviewer: Bold all instances of property names. 
```suggestion
**LOD Type** determines how the level of detail (LOD) is selected during rendering.
```

{{< tabs name="lod-type-ui" >}}
{{% tab name="Default" %}}

![lod-type-default](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/mesh/lod-type-ui/mesh-default.png)

> LOD Type: `Default` uses the configured *default method* for automatically selecting the LOD. O3DE ships using the Screen Coverage method as the default method. If the *default method* is changed in the future, the component automatically uses the new default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**LOD Type**: `Default` uses the configured *default method* for automatically selecting the LOD. O3DE ships using the Screen Coverage method as the default method. If the *default method* is changed in the future, the component automatically uses the new default.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Screen Coverage" %}}

![lod-type-screen-coverage](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/mesh/lod-type-ui/mesh-screen-coverage.png)

> LOD Type: `Screen Coverage` determines which LOD should be rendered based on the approximate proportion of the screen that the LOD will cover.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**LOD Type**: `Screen Coverage` determines which LOD to render based on the approximate proportion of the screen that the LOD will cover.
```

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|
| **LOD Configuration - Minimum Screen Coverage** | Minimum proportion of screen area that the entity will cover. If the entity is smaller than the minimum coverage, it is culled. | 0.0 to 1.0 | 1.0f / 1080.0f |
| **LOD Configuration - Quality Decay Rate** | Rate at which the mesh quality decays. <br><br>`0` - Always stays at highest quality LOD. <br><br>`1` - Immediately falls off to lowest quality LOD. | 0.0 to 1.0 | 0.5 |

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Specific LOD" %}}

![lod-type-specific-lod](/images/user-guide/components/reference/atom/mesh/lod-type-ui/mesh-specific-lod.png)

> LOD Type: `Specific LOD` specifies the LOD to render, overriding the automatic LOD calculations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**LOD Type**: `Specific LOD` specifies the LOD to render, overriding the automatic LOD calculations.
```

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|

> | **LOD Configuration - LOD Override** | Sets the specific LOD to render. | LOD 0 (Highest Detail) to LOD *n*, where *n* is the lowest detail LOD | Highest |

Reviewer: I suggest adding to the description about how the number of LODs varies. 
```suggestion
| **LOD Configuration - LOD Override** | Sets the specific LOD to render. The number of LODs depends on how many LODs the asset has. | LOD 0 (Highest Detail) to LOD *n*, where *n* is the lowest detail LOD | LOD 0 (Highest Detail) |
```
